+++
date = "2012-08-27T00:00:00-04:00"
title = "Complexity and Value"
draft = false

+++

I have a little Linux computer set up at work, which is quietly updating itself as I write.  I like linux, philosophically, and if and when I really get it working, it seems that it will be much more powerful than what I'm currently using.

The thing about Linux is that it is not afraid to hit you in the face with complexity.  Macs hide complexity carefully away, Windows only shows it when things break hideously, but Linux revels in it.

This gets back to a couple of fundamental things that I go back and forth about, mostly having to do with time, and how time can be used.  If the basic resources for doing things, to pull an idea from [Merlin Mann](http://www.merlinmann.com/), are time and attention, then the argument for doing things with a more complex machine comes down to the proposition that productivity, once the initial learning curve is surmounted, will be sufficiently higher than the productivity from a simpler device as to make it worth the time invested.  'Invested' is a pretty good metaphor here, actually - you sink resources into a project in the expectation of a return on investment, and you sink time into learning a technology in expectation of better results.  In both cases the scale of the investment relative to the scale of the result is the important comparison, but it's a hard equivalency to draw with computers.

It's pretty easy, or at least straightforward, to measure the return on a financial investment and tell with hindsight how successful it was.  You measure the inputs (in money), the outputs (in money) and the time taken and you have a very simple set of metrics to compare against other investments.  Doing this with technology (in the broad, [Kevin Kelly](http://kk.org/) sense of the term) is quite a bit trickier, as outputs, and even time taken, are pretty amorphous and slippery concepts.

For example, take the perennial choice of PC operating system.  The major flavors are Mac, Windows and Linux and each presents a balance of learning curve, power and cost.  Operating under the presumption that the goal is to achieve maximum productivity, and that productivity is a function of power and ease of use (the reverse, let's say, of the learning curve), to be measured against cost.  Linux is free, Windows is cheap and Macs are expensive; Linux and Mac boxes are powerful, Windows and Macs are easy to use.  How do you compare these factors against each other in any meaningful way?  One could equally reasonably argue for Macs or Linux boxes given the variables of effort and money - there's no clear exchange rate between them, and this complicates things.

A lot of this kind of thinking crystallized for me when I started thinking about time and money as currencies, exchangeable to a limited extent for each other.  I trade skilled time to an employer for money; I can then spend that money to save myself work, and thus time.  The more skilled I am, the more money I can make per unit of time/work, and thus the more time I have.  This is, obviously, a bit of an ourobouros, and it's easy to lose sight of the point of this somewhat-circular exchange.  It helps, when making decisions about time and money, to think with an exchange rate derived from my observed income.  When it's all added up, I get a value, x, which is the amount of money I make per the number of hours I work (it varies, obviously, with jobs, and time, and location, and it's often surprisingly low).  Empirically, this is the rate at which I am willing to sell my time, and any better exchange rate is worth jumping at, while any worse exchange rate is a marginal transaction at best.  So a $(.5x) cab fare to save a 45 minute walk is a good move, while a $(3x) piece of software that will save me 2 hours of poring over manuals is questionable.

I could probably get ensnared in some pretty weird thinking if I continued down this road too far, though - for one thing, time is the most limited resource there is, while money is famously creatable.  This line of thinking could reasonably lead one to conclude that well-made, user-friendly devices are bargains at any price, and that time should be given an essentially infinite value versus money.  If you really carried that idea to its logical conclusion, though, you would also conclude that being an employee is a pretty bad deal even under relatively good conditions, and that the proper course of action is to participate in the economy just enough to survive (or, more charitably, until the point of diminishing returns on wealth vs comfort/ease/happiness) and spend the rest of your time doing - what?

It's interesting, and possibly even meaningful, that most of my questions about things eventually boil down to the question "how should I live?"
